---
layout: post
title:  "Bannatyne Wikithon"
date:   2020-11-25 00:00:00 -0600
categories: bannatyne project
---
**Bannatyne Wikithon: 2 December 2020 @ 2pm GMT**

*Keywords: Older Scots, manuscript culture, 15th century, 16th century, Wikipedia editing*

As part of the Leverhulme-funded project ‘Digitising the Bannatyne MS (c. 1568)’ you are invited to join a unique Wikipedia Edit-A-Thon, in collaboration with the National Library of Scotland and the University of Saskatchewan.

**No previous Wikipedia experience is necessary: this is a friendly, open and welcoming environment to try your hand at some editing!**

The Bannatyne manuscript (NLS Adv. 1.1.6) is the single most important collection of Older Scots verse. Compiled in the 1560s by George Bannatyne, a young Edinburgh burgess, the collection is distinguished by its unique division by genre into sections on theology, morality, comedy, love and animal fables. Produced during the volatile climate of Mary’s reign, the manuscript offers insights into religious and social values in its selections and censorship. It is also an artefact of an Edinburgh in which the plague ran rife and citizens were forced into self-isolation.

This event aims to create, edit and curate entries relating to the manuscript, its contents, the people associated with the poems, and the historical and social context of 16th century Scotland. Sources and suggestions will be made available on the day, but you are welcome to come with your own ideas. We are particularly interested in articles and research pertaining to the role of women at this time.

A provisional schedule is shared below. If you cannot make the event in its entirety but are keen to attend, please let us know and we can do our best to make accommodations!

**To book a place on this exciting event, please contact [lucy.hinnie@usask.ca](lucy.hinnie@usask.ca).**

**Provisional Schedule**

14:00 -- Introduction and Bannatyne MS overview
14:20 -- Guide to editing Wikipedia
15:15 -- Coffee break
15:30 -- Article writing/editing
16:30 -- Check in
16:45 -- Article writing/editing
17:30 -- Article publishing
17:45 -- Final reflections and wrap up
